== Chapter 1

Bisky hadn't prepared any words to commemorate her father that morning. Her
mother would have disapproved, but even she wasn't around to tell her that.
Bisky did honor them in her quiet little way, but the fact of the matter is,
she had just spent the last five or six days alone in her studio apartment
doing nothing at all. Couldn't even think straight. No time or energy to
come up with any words.

Gardenia checked in with her the previous day. Bisky appreciated that. As
she walked to the temple, she reminded herself to thank Gardenia for keeping
such a sweet eye on her. Friends to the absolute bitterest end. Suddenly, a
fleeting, wispy vision of Gardenia attending her own funeral shot through
Bisky's imagination -- and then evaporated.  Bisky had to stop in her tracks
to recollect herself. She shook her head on purpose to wake herself up. _I
guess it's one of_ those _days,_ she thought to herself.

The temple was in a quiet, residential neighborhood of Port Sokuit, which is
a remarkable thing, since Port Sokuit is actually a bustling, nonstop city
and one of the primary economic centers of Azuaveria. Sunday mornings were
usually quieter, to be sure, but Bisky somehow knew this morning in
particular was the quietest. So quiet that she swore she could hear the sun
shining. So quiet as to allow that weird vision she just had to creep into
her brain.

It was a modest but beautiful Mephitidaean temple. Bisky remembered the
temple being much, much bigger when she was younger. She wanted to retain
that sense of wonder, that sensation all pups experience where everything
feels new and exciting. But, over time, her grip had loosened as her paws
got tired. And for the first time in her life, just five or six days ago,
she had let go entirely.

As always, the grand, cedar doors were propped wide open. The voices of
dozens of other skunks reverberated through the temple's chambers and
spilled outside, down the steps Bisky was climbing. She immediately
recognized Uncle Roscoe's guffaw within the mixture of voices, and couldn't
help but crack a smile herself. It was the first laughter she had heard in
nearly a week.

Bisky climbed over the last step and was finally able to see inside the
temple. There were approximately two, three dozen skunks. She hated to admit
it, but she did find great solace being in a room filled only with skunks.
It was not a feeling joy or ecstasy, really, but rather...  warmth.
Security. And, most importantly, understanding.

It was so bright outside that from the inside of the temple, any figure who
stood at the entrance would appear as just a shadow. Gardenia instinctually
recognized Bisky's silhouette approaching the threshold and approached her.
Bisky gave her friend the kind of hug that only best friends give.

"`Thank you,`" Bisky whispered.

"`Feeling better?`" Gardenia asked, smiling.

Bisky nodded gently, cautiously, as if she was afraid her head might fall
off if she wasn't careful.

"`Your Uncle Roscoe is a funny sort,`" Gardenia remarked.

"`Yeah, he's like that.`"

"`I'm glad you made it, Bisky.`" Bisky could tell she meant that from deep
within.

"`Yeah.`" Bisky smiled.

Gardenia opened up a box of breath mints and offered them. The spicy,
cinnamon kind, to Bisky's delight. She giggled for the first time in over a
week. She gratefully accepted one, and then reached into her back pocket and
produced a box of more candylike breath mints for Gardenia. Gardenia was
pleased to see her friend had returned to something that resembled normal.

The services began a few minutes later. In traditional Mephitidaean style,
all the skunks were seated on the floor in a semicircle around a portrait of
Petrus Damiat. It was an enlarged photograph from his young adult years.
Bisky recognized the portrait from the countless albums her family
maintained, spotlighting Petrus proudly showing off what was his brand new
work outfit -- a white apron and a funny white hat. Bisky remembered that
skunk. She also remembered the skunk that was dying in the hospital. She
couldn't help but concentrate on both of those skunks at the same time,
which confused her. She tried to ignore it and focus on what was happening
instead. The bespectacled priestess read from an ancient but well preserved
book.

"`May his soul find eternal peace, and may he find solace in the grace and
everlasting benevolence of The Maker. We pray his path to that end is
straightforward and clear, and we beg that it shall not be crooked nor
perilous.  We offer the following gifts to ensure his journey is a pleasant
one.`" 

_Oh, shit,_ Bisky thought.

One by one, all of the skunks approached the portrait and left something
behind for him. Petrus's cousin, Acanthus, gave him a small sextant, a nod
to their sailing hobby, and recounted an anecdote about how they nearly got
lost at sea one time. He mentioned in passing how Bisky was jealous she
couldn't come along for that trip. She remembered that feeling.

The landlady of Petrus's bakery, Amethyst, presented a bouquet of flowers
and, while eyeing Bisky, formally absolved him of the last month's rent he
hadn't yet paid. Bisky totally forgot that was a thing that needed to be
taken care of, until that moment.

Gardenia approached with a small blueberry muffin. "`You were without a
doubt the best baker in all of Port Sokuit. Your blueberry muffin was the
very first thing I ever tasted from your bakery. I was just a pup, but I
remember that taste so well. I couldn't possibly make something as wonderful
as you do, but, as a token of thanks, I hope you enjoy this.`" She put the
muffin on the ground by the picture. "`Also, I hope I wasn't a bother,
showing up at your house all the time... well, goodbye, Mr. Bisky's Dad.`"

Big, lumbering Uncle Roscoe approached the picture. "`It's my favorite
brother-in-law! Look at'chyu.  You're the greatest... Hey, hey, I got you
this.`" He gestured the bottle of mead he held in this paw, and then placed
it on the floor along with the other things. "`It's the real special stuff,
all the way from Resanna, remember when we went to Resanna? ...`" He paused,
as if he didn't know what to say. Uncle Roscoe always had something to say. 

"`...you... you were the greatest pal any skunk could ever have. I mean that
from the bottom of my enlarged heart.`" Some of the skunks chuckled at that.
"`You made beautiful food and you lived a beautiful life with your beautiful
daughter in a beautiful neighborhood. I always wanted to be like you, man. I
always joked about how I got jealous that it was my sister who married you,
not me.`" More chuckles. "`Well. In case you get a little tired on your trip
to the afterlife or whatever, feel free. Mead from Resanna, on me. Cheers,
mate.`"

Uncle Roscoe quietly returned to his spot on the floor. It was so nearly
imperceptible and happened very quickly, to the extent that Bisky thought
it wasn't really happening, but that was the first time she ever saw her
Uncle Roscoe cry. 

Eventually, it was Bisky's turn. She heard all the creaks in everyone's
necks as they turned their heads to face her. She could tell they noticed
she was emptypawed, and hated feeling like the center of attention at an
event such as this. But she had a trick up her tail to deal with
uncomfortable situations like that.

As she slowly approached the picture, she focused on it intensely. She was
transfixed. The temple melted and all the other skunks faded away. The only
things that existed in the universe were Bisky and Petrus. The photo was
black and white, but she gazed into his eyes and saw the vivid, handsome
emerald color that they really were. She had never stood face to face with
an image of a young Petrus before. Not like this. Never one that was even
remotely life-sized. After realizing what was actually going on, she gasped.

In that moment, Bisky saw what her mother had seen.

She gently grazed the photo up and down with her eyes. She wanted to touch
Petrus's face. She wanted him to be there forever. She wanted to tell him
everything. She wanted to tell him that she loved him.

"`Oh my Maker I totally get it.`"

She didn't even realize she said it out loud, nor notice all the other
skunks being visibly confused.

Still overcome with love or bliss or whatever the heck it was, Bisky kissed
Petrus on the cheek.

Some of the skunks thought that was weird. Most of them thought it was sweet
and also weird.

Bisky's world slowly crystallized and faded back in. Eventually, she
remembered that she was actually at the Mephitidaean temple and that her
father actually wasn't there. She looked around and saw the other skunks
staring at her. Only Gardenia seemed to understand what had just happened.
She decided now was not the time to feel embarrassed, and quietly returned
to her place and sat down.

As the next skunks approached the picture to make further offerings, Bisky
confirmed to herself that episode wasn't embarrassing at all. Instead, it
was the most clarity she had experienced in five or six days.


